---
title: "Discussion Questions"
author_profile: true
layout: single

collection: casestudy
permalink: /casestudy/questions/
---

### Coded Femininity and The Influencer Industry

1. The case argues that AI doesn't just reflect bias but _amplifies_ it. Using examples like virtual assistants or text-to-image models, how does this amplification happen, and why is it more dangerous than a other cases like the sue of photoshop?<br>
2. The "Silent Plastic Woman" describes a digital persona that is perfectly beautiful, always agreeable, and never has a bad day. From an economic perspective, why might companies want to create and promote this specific archetype? What human qualities (like emotional support, aesthetic appeal, or social charm) are being turned into a product in this process?<br>
3. Companies often say they give AI assistants female voices because users "prefer" them. How can we tell if this is a true personal preference or something we've all been taught to expect? Why does figuring out the difference matter for how these technologies shape our ideas about gender?

### Impact on Identity & Relationships

4. "Digitized dysmorphia" is the pressure to look like a body that was designed by a computer, not born from nature. How is comparing yourself to an AI-generated ideal different from comparing yourself to a Photoshopped model in a magazine? Why might the AI version be more confusing or damaging to our self-image?<br>
5. People have always felt connections to distant celebrities they've never met. What's different about feeling a connection to a _virtual_ influencer, especially one like Neurosama, whose posts and personality are generated by an algorithm without a human directly controlling every word?<br>
6. The case suggests that in a busy, sometimes lonely world, virtual influencers can act as an easy, low-effort substitute for real friendship and community. Do you think this is mostly true, or can following and interacting with these digital personas also lead to positive, genuine social bonds with others? Explain your view.

### Stakeholders & Ethical Futures

7. Looking at the different groups involved, tech companies, brands, users, human influencers, and regulators, who has the most power to improve how virtual influencers are made and used? Who faces the most potential harm? Are the people with the most power also the ones most at risk?<br>
8. Imagine you are a policymaker. Which **one** regulatory action would be the most important to implement? What would be the biggest obstacle?<br>
9. In the case study it is argued that AI can help create a more diverse and liberating ideas but not with the current system in place. What specific conditions (like corporate goals, design processes, or regulations) would need to be different? Do you think AI could ever be a force for challenging gender stereotypes?